Sureties and Pledges in the Finnṡruth Fíthail

* Introductory Remarks

This talk will focus on a small amount of text contained with the
legal dialogue Finnṡruth Fíthail, which records a dialogue between
Fíthal, a legendary judge and his son Socht.  The author of the text
is currently unknown.  As Fíthal is a rather obscure character, I will
give some general introductions to him and his place in early Irish
literature.  I will also discuss some textual notes on the Finnṡruth
Fíthail.  Much of this talk is based on my beginning investigations of
the text as I have not had the time to devote to it as I would have
liked.  Therefore, much of this should be taken in the spirit of
work-in-progress rather than a complete investigation.

* Introduction to the Texts

Fíthal is a mythological judge who is connected to the equally
mythological king Cormac mac Airt (see Ó Cathasaigh,
http://lccn.loc.gov/79344195).  He appears in many different places
within early Irish literature.  For instance, he appears in a Middle
Irish poetic dialogue opposite Cormac mac Airt (see my forthcoming
edition).  In many ways, he is comparable with Morann and Caratina
both of whom are more well-known in modern academic circles.  For more
information you can consult my thesis, which is avaliable online at
http://hdl.handle.net/1842/3320.

There are two legal texts which are attributed to Fíthal: Aí Emnach,
which appears in _Forbuis Droma Damhghaire_
(http://hdl.handle.net/1842/3320, p. 75) but which is now lost except
for a few stray references and Finnṡruth Fíthail, the focus of this
particular talk.

The Finnṡruth Fíthail is preserved in two copies.  The A text, which
is in CIH 786.25--789.17, is the older of the two.  For instance, it
preserves the late verbal of necessity _finnta_ from the verb ro-fitir
"to know". The A version preserves some of the original text and
extensive commentary.  I have not yet attempted to unpack the
commentary from the original text even if such a distinction should be
made.  However, the MS is acephelous and the text is cut off after
only a few pages. The B text in CIH 2131.1--2143.40 is more extensive
of the two but it is later Old Irish and Middle Irish.  More to the
point, the B version preserves only block capital copies of the
questions asked which is then followed by extensive commmentary.
However, as we will see, it preserves some interesting points of
procedure which the A version does not.

The structure of the Finnṡruth Fíthail is that of a dialogue between
Fíthal and Socht, who would become Fíthal's son in later literature.
In addition to the dialogue format, each topic covered by the text is
introduced by Socht with the formula _co ber breith_ which means "how
should/shall I judge".  Roland Smith, in the early 20th century,
attempted to adduce this as a general rule in early Irish law but this
is assuredly not the case as the formula is too general to be pressed
into service in this way (see Smith,
http://www.vanhamel.nl/wiki/Smith_1931a). This dialogue structure is
neatly complemented by Gúbretha Caratniad and Audacht Morainn, which
also uses the dialogue format to achieve its purpose.

More generally, many early Irish legal texts have a question and
answer format.  While the questioner and respondent are generally
anonymous, the format is one that seemed to sit comfortably within the
scholastic environment in medieval Ireland.  As others have said, much
of what we have of the early Irish legal corpus are handbooks rather
than law itself.  Here anonymous and legendary figures loom large to
validate the law and instruct students in it within the context of
universal wisdom literature (for more information see, Yocum
http://openurl.ingenta.com/content?genre=article&issn=0081-6353&volume=46&issue=1&spage=39&epage=58).

As for the topics covered, six of the questions ask about domestic
arrangements, which would have been keen points of concern in a rural
community. Four of the questions are concerned with territories and
inter-territorial strife which, while not of such immediate concern in
daily life was of frequent occurrence and affected everybody. Three of
the questions are about contracts and contract law, which was another
aspect of community life that often gave rise to litigation and the
need for arbitration. Another three deal with the status of persons;
the relevance of this topic to the circumstances of every family in
the _túath_ would have been obvious.

Scholars generally postulate two legal schools in the Old Irish period
(see Kelly, pp. 242-248, http://lccn.loc.gov/89151457).  The first is
the _Senchas Már_ school which compiled the great compendium of early
Irish law.  The other, according to Binchy, is the nemed-school, which
seems to be preoccupied with the rights of nemed class persons.  The
Finnṡruth Fíthail seems to fall into the Senchas Már school.  However,
Fíthal, as a character, does appear in more southerly texts.

* Introduction Pledges and Sureties

For this particular talk, I will cover one of the three sections on
contracts.  In this case pledges and surieties.

Of course pledges and sureties are an integral part of any legal
system.  Even in modern legal systems, sureties are used to obtain
loans and underpin other financial transactions, usually by
counter-signing a promissory note or some other legal instrument.
Pledges are also a large part of the modern legal system.  For
instance, when obtaining a mortgage (a gage being a form of pledge),
potential borrowers usually must make a pledge of 10% to 20% of the
mortgage's value.  This is also known as having "skin in the game" in
City parlance.

In early Irish law, pledges are items of value which are given to the
counter-party in a contract to ensure the terms of the contract are
faithfully carried out.  Pledges can be given on the behalf of another
person.  These pledges accrue interest while they are out of the
possession of the pledgee.  If the pledge becomes forfeit the pledgee
is entitled to compensation.

Sureties and pledges are connected as they both attempt to ensure that
contracts are executed as agreed (for sureities, McLeod, pp. 16-21,
http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/27258857).  Unlike a pledge which is an
item, a surety, a person or persons, puts themselves as liable
for the contract if it is not executed.  Also, they are a feature of
the legal procedure as they are used to ensure the "paths of
judgement" (see Stacey http://lccn.loc.gov/93047677).

* Pledges and Sureties in the Finnṡruth Fíthail A Text

As I am still working on the edition of the Finnṡruth Fíthail, I will
focus on a couple of interesting facets of pledges and sureties as it
shows some aspects of judicial procedure.  A note about the
provenance of this text.  According to the manuscript catalogue, TCD
MS 1337 was purchased by Edward Lhwyd from Agnew who is described as
the hereditary bard of O'Niell of Clannaboy in northern Ulster (see
http://lccn.loc.gov/22025414, pg. 140).  It is a miscelleny containing
both religious and secular material, including sections from Crith
Gablach.

The section which covers pledges is introduced as: _Co ber breith im
techtae ngill_ "how should/shall I judge concerning lawful pledges" in
the A text.  It then discusses pledges which cover situations like
restitution and how to judge pledges which are securities.  These
pledges are described as _imarcradho_ or excess goods.  The
intensifier _imar-_ is often, according to DIL (DIL I 126.052),
meaningless. In this situation, Fíthal advises that "judging security
with that should be[ ]should be like which is belonging to the pledged
object" or in other words, when judging a situation which arises out
of a disputed pledge, the judge should adjudge compensation which is
like in form to the object pledged in the first instance.  This makes
sense as pledges were often intimate items to the pledgee.  For
instance, as Prof. Kelly notes, a "work-bag" or an embroiderer's
needles.  These objects needed to be replaced for the person to
continue with their work or profession.  In the case of a judge it was
five ounces of silver.

In this section, the Finnṡruth Fíthail also discusses sureties.  In
this instance, "surety goes on heirs to the ninth generation".  This
is a rather dramatic turn from pledges to sureties and how long they
last.  Also, most contracts are not multi-generational in nature and
it raises the question as to how long a contract can be made for.
Also, while we are on the subject, a historian would be needed to
validate a surety which lasts this long.  In terms of court
proceedure, a historian was a part of the proceedings in the
"side-court" of a full public court hearing (see Fergus Kelly's
article on the setup of a full court hearing,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1484/J.Peri.3.129), which would generally be held
at an oenach.  Thus, contracts could possibly be made such that a
historian was necessary to validate any surety.  _Berrad Airechta_ and
_Di astud chor_ both set out the necessity of sureties and pledges in
any contract drafting and agreement situation.  Neither of these law
texts places a length of time on surieties that I have found.  In fact,
it is interesting to note that _Di astud chor_ cites Adam's contract
for the apple in the garden of Eden as lasting forever after.  If
sureities did not last longer than nine generations then subequently
the contract would become unenforceable and would put a practical end
to a contract.

The next paragraph of the A text covers the honour price which is due
to a surety if the counter-party for which they went surety should
default on the contract.  After this it discusses what a surety can be
made for.  For example, "the surety does not go but with hereditary
property".  A commentary which follows this sentence states: "it is
against immoveables which are the sureties".  Essentially, a surety
could only become a surety with immoveable items.  This is a practical
solution as moveable items could be taken away in the night such as
cow herds and other smaller items.  Although, the procedure for
distraint depends upon moveable things such as cow herds.

The last paragraph before the acephelus end of the manuscript
describes the penalty for the heirs of a dead man who impugne a
contract on the land.  In normal circumstances in early Irish law
generally on the death of a father, the sons divided the inherited
land among themselves along the maxim: "the youngest divides and the
eldest chooses" (see Kelly, pg. 102, http://lccn.loc.gov/89151457).
This intimates that contracts on land could outlive the person who
made them.  This correlates nicely with the idea above that a surety
goes for nine generations.  For instance, a contractor's sons plus the
progeny of his surety would be legally bound by the contract long
after the contractor was dead.  I would speculate at this point that a
contract would enjoin the heirs when disposing of their inheritance.

* Pledges and Sureties in the Finnṡruth Fíthail B Text

Again a note on the MS provenance, the manuscript catalogue notes that
the manscript was written for the Mac Aodhagáin law school.
Unfortunately, however, not much more is known about this MS (see
http://lccn.loc.gov/22025414, pg. 249).

As I said earlier, the B text is mostly commentary.  In this case the
text is thus: CO BER BREITH IM TECHTA NGILL ⁊RL-.  As one will notice,
the last part is marked as "⁊RL-".  This stands for _et reliqua_ "and
the rest".  Basically, the line from Finnṡruth Fíthail is used to
remind the reader of the law before launching into an extended
commentary.  "⁊RL-" is used several times within the commentary
itself.  It would seem that there was much more text available to
which a judge may have had access or had memorized. The commentary
itself is mostly in later Old Irish and early Middle Irish which is
based on the fact that there are independant pronouns in use and
petrified infix pronouns in certain verbs such as _atbeir_ "says" from
as-beir "to say".

Unfortunately, I haven't worked on this section as much as I have on
the A text so this will necessarily be a more tentative assessment of
the text.  However, what immediately comes into focus from a
procedural point of view is that the commentary discusses _in fer
amuigh_ "plaintiff" and _in fer tall_ "defendant".  It also has the
defendant and plaintiff speak.  For instance, the defendant is made to
say: _"tainic" ar se "⁊ rotroiscestar, ⁊ targus gill ⁊ airgi do ⁊
nochar geib"_ (roughtly translated: "he came", says he, "and he has
been fasting, and I offered pledges and a herd of cattle(?) for it and
which he did not take").  Other texts on legal procedure such as
Berrad Airechta (see Stacey, pp. 210-233,
http://lccn.loc.gov/86160917) also feature places where legally
formulaic phrases are placed.

After the familar opening line from the A text, the B text launches
into a discussion of a dispute concerning pledges.  It uses the
terminology of "defendant" and "plaintiff."  The circumstances of the
dispute are unclear.  However, it seems that the nemed-class person
used a non-nemed-class person's item as a pledge.  Then it seems that
the pledge was lost.  More interestingly, the dispute seems to be
between persons of unequal status.  This is brought home by the
discussion of the plaintiff fasting against the defendant.  The
fasting proceedure was used generally when a person wished to bring a
case against a nemed (or exempt) person including: kings, poets, and
the higher levels of nobility.  Here it seems that the plaintiff
obtained a hearing based on fasting against a nemed-class person to
which that person assented.  In addition, it seems that the fasting
proceedure was misused by the defendant as the plaintiff says he
offered a pledge.  The argument goes back and forth but there seems to
be duplication of content.  However, the outcomes seems to be that
compensation was due to the defendant and that it was doubled in the
case where the fasting proceedure was used inappropriately.
Unfortunately, the commentary then switches so we cannot know for
certain what the outcome of the case was.

The problem of case law in early Irish law is well known.  I am not
sure how exactly to understand the case presented.  On the one hand,
it presents an interesting circumstance where a pledge was given to a
member of the nobility, which is generally considered unwise.  The
plaintiff then fasts against the defendant, which is a particularly
public action.  On the other hand, given that the early Irish that we
have consists of mainly manuals and handbooks, this might just be a
commentor giving a theoretical case study rather than an actual case.
However this does give us more information on how the fasting
proceedure would work after having brought the defendant to a judge.

* Conclusion 

As we have seen, pleges and surieties were and are a large part of any
legal system.  They raised the confidence of both parties that the
terms of the contract would be executed in a timely fashion.  In the
terms set out by the two versions of the Finnṡruth Fíthail, a
replacement pledge must be of the form of the original pledge and
sureties go to the ninth generation.  In addition, the B text has a
case study based on a nemed class person and a non-nemed-class person
based on pledges.

Further research of course is necessary both on pledges and sureties
in early Irish law more generally and Finnṡruth Fíthail in particular.
I hope to continue to work on Finnṡruth Fíthail and bring an edition
out at some point in the future.  I do not wish to give you a
particular timeline as I am not employed as an academic and I do not
have the space to be able to devote more time to it at the moment.
However, I keep my notes on the web and if you are interested, I can
give you the access information and you can keep track of my progress
there.
